Hello there. In this video, we are going to briefly look at the structure of threaded programs and then
find out how to launch a thread in C++.
With a single threaded program, which is what you normally get, there is a main function and there is
a single thread of control known as the main thread.
So the program will call the main() function.
This thread will continue executing. The main function could go off and call some other functions.
And eventually the main function returns, the main thread ends and the program terminates.
When we have a multithreaded program, we still have the main function and the main thread. But we
can start up other threads. Each thread starts executing some function that we tell it to execute.
So in this case, we're running a function called task() and we are starting up a new thread to run this.
By default, the main thread is going to continue executing while
this thread executes at the same time as well.
We can tell the main threat to stop and wait until the thread finishes, if that is what we need to do.
This task() is like any other function. It can call functions itself and it can also start threads itself.
And the main function can start more threads as well.
So when the thread starts executing, the entry point function that we associate with that thread is
called, and when that function returns, that thread will end.
And the main thread does not wait for other threads unless we explicitly tell it to.
In C++, there's a close coupling between the thread objects and the threads provided by the operating
system.
There is a class in the standard library called thread, which manages this, and it is defined in the
header, which is also called thread.
A thread object manages a kernel thread, so it is a resource management class.
So like most classes which manage resources, it cannot be copied, but it can be moved.
It is the same as with files.
If you have a class which manages a file handle, then you cannot copy that class because it would be
chaos if two different classes think they both own the same file handle.
The constructor for the thread takes a callable object as its first argument, so that could be a function
pointer.
It could be a lambda expression.
It could be a functor with an overloaded operator.
It could be a member function pointer.
It could be an object created by bind() and so on.
And this is the entry point to the thread.
So this is the code that the thread is going to start executing when it runs.
The function, the callable object that we pass to the thread must not be overloaded.
We can give it arguments and it can take these by value, by reference or by move.
If it returns a value, then that [value] is going to be ignored.
We will find out later on how to get a value from a thread.
Once we create our thread object, it will start running immediately and calling the function with the
arguments we give it. You do not have to tell it to run, like you do in Java.
And there is only one thread class in C++.
If you want the parent - the main thread or some other thread which starts a thread - if we want that
to stop and wait for the thread, we call the join() member function on the thread.
So if we're in main() and we create a thread object, we can call it t, and if we call t.join(),
then the main function will stop and wait until the thread has terminated.
If we do not do that, the parent will carry on executing and it is possible that the main thread and
therefore the program will terminate
while the thread is still running and that's not good.
OK, so I'm going to write a threaded program now.
I'm including the thread header.
I'm going to write my function.
So this is very simple.
It's basically the thread version of "Hello World".
So we are just going to print out "Hello Thread". We have a function that takes no arguments and returns nothing.
Keep it nice and simple.
And then in the main function I will create a thread instance.
And then I am going to initialize it with the name of this callable object, which is a function pointer
to my hello function.
And let's see what happens if I run, just run that as it is.
Oops!
Now, it has printed out "Hello thread".
So it has called this thread function.
The problem is that we did not stop and wait for the thread to complete.
So the main thread terminated before this one had finished.
So let's fix this.
So we put a join() call.
So we call the join() member function of our thread object. Let's see if it works properly this time.
Yes, that's better.
So you should always call join() when you create a thread.
You can do some work in between here so
we could, for example...
"Doing some work..."
And that's interesting. Because they are both running at the same time, the output is actually mixed
up.
So we have got to "doing some work". Then
We have got the "Hello Thread" and then we have got the new line from this, after the "Hello Thread" printed.
So that is something that is worth remembering.
When you have threads running at the same time, their actions can "interleave".
And we will have lots more to say about this later on.
Let's take a look now at a function which takes an argument.
So I've got this hello function, which is
passed the string instead of doing it itself.
We'll have to give this a different name because we cannot have overloaded functions.
So I will call this hello2, then we put hello2...
(Let's just comment this out for now,
get rid of this) and see what happens if we try and compile that.
It's not going to work. No.
"no matching function", because we need to give it an argument.
So let's say...
So there we go, let's try running that.
There we are, "hello thread".
I have actually got two new lines!
Let's try it again...
There we are.
Okay. We can also pass the arguments by reference as well as by value,
so in this case, we are creating
a temporary string and passing that value.
But if you want to have a function which takes an argument by reference, so let's say...
So we are going to the string then we are going to change its value...
And we need hello3, we need to give it an argument, so let's have...
string "abc". We need to include the string header for that to compile.
Let's clear these out...
So we call this hello3 function.
If we just give it, s, it is not going to work.
Because it needs a reference and we're just passing it by value.
What we can do is put this std::ref() around it and that will convert it to a reference.
This is actually a template function.
So it is basically a kind of cast.
OK, and for bonus points, let's prove that we have actually changed the string!
Yes, so there we are. The string is now "xyz". So it was "abc", we passed it to this function that takes the
string by reference.
It changed the value to "xyz", and then in main() this string has now been changed to "xyz".
We can also do pass by move.
So let's put a function in which is going to take the ownership. We could put the double refs && in here,
but it is not actually necessary because we're going to use std::move().
Let's put the double refs in here for the time being.
So instead of using std::ref() to cast it to an lvalue reference, we are going to use std::move() to cast it to
an rvalue reference. (And change the function...)
Let's see what that does.
So we've got the ownership of "abc", so this function has been called.
The string in here is empty because
the data has been moved out of it.
So when we put std::move() around the argument,
that gets moved into the thread function.
So the data gets transferred from this string instance here to the local string instance inside func().
And then when we examine s, there is nothing in it.
This is actually not sound because the data has been moved out of it.
So it is not actually in a valid state.
It is safe to assign to this variable, but not to read from it.
So we are a bit naughty, really!
Anyway, we proved that the data has been moved from the string.
We can also have member functions as the thread function.
So I have got this class here which has a member function called hello().
So the class greeter and the hello member function.
So we want to call that.
So let's just comment this out for a minute.
So we need to create an instance of this class....
Then we create our thread instance....
And it's going to be greet...
And if you remember when we call a member function, it gets a copy of the "this" pointer, which is
the object that it has been called on.
So we need to provide that as well.
So we need to provide the address of the object that we want it to be called on.
(And let's use the correct type of bracket!)
Okay.
Then we need to join on that...
And let's try that out.
I've got something wrong!
OK.
It should be an ampersand in front of the name of the member function,
so ampersand, class name, double colon,
function name to get the member function pointer and then the address of the object.
So there we are.
"Hello,
member function". I finally got it to work!
OK, so that's probably enough for one video.
The main things to remember are that we have this standard library thread class.
We use #include  to work with it.
I don't think you need any extra libraries these days, if you have a modern compiler.
To start a thread, you create an instance of the thread class, the first argument is the function or
some other callable object,
and that will get called when the thread starts up.
The following arguments to the thread constructor will get forwarded to that function.
You can use references or move as you wish.
The thread that you start up and the thread that you are creating it in will run at the same time and
you need to call join() on the new thread, to make the existing threat stop and wait for it.
And if you do not do that, it could finish before the new thread does.
OK, then, I'll see you next time.